---
aip:
title: x-chain DAA authentication using Sign Personal Message with Sui
author: 0xmaayan, igor-aptos
Status: Draft
type: Framework
discussions-to (*optional):
created: 06/11/2025
---

# AIP-X - x-chain DAA authentication using Sign Personal Message with Sui

## Summary

Implements authentication function giving Sui users native Aptos accounts,
and allowing them to sign transaction on Aptos blockchain, directly from their Sui wallet.
This is done using derivable account abstraction (AIP-113).

## High-level Overview

Allow Sui accounts (Sui Ed25519 key pairs) to create Aptos transactions,
and be able to autheneticate and execute them directly on the Aptos blockchain, without interaction with Sui Blockchain.
We do so by utilizing ["Sign Personal Message"](https://docs.sui.io/standards/wallet-standard#implementing-features) specification, and defining
a message format that gives enough details to users so they understand what they are signing reasonably well.

## Impact

This will allow users with Sui Wallets to be able to interact with Aptos blockchain

## Alternative Solutions

Alternatively, wallets from other chains can implement integration with Aptos natively, providing more seamless experience to the users.

## Specification and Implementation Details

dApp is required to issue signPersoanlMessage request to the wallet with:

```
<domain> wants you to sign in with your Sui account:
<sui_address>

Please confirm you explicitly initiated this request from <domain>. You are approving to execute transaction <entry_function> on Aptos blockchain (<network_name>).

Nonce: <aptos_txn_digest>
```

And submit transaction to Aptos with Authenticator:

```
AccountAuthenticator::Abstraction {
    function_info: FunctionInfo::from("0x1::sui_derivable_account::authenticate"),
    auth_data: AbstractionAuthData::DerivableV1 {
        signing_message_digest: aptos_txn_digest,
        abstract_signature: bcs::to_bytes(SuiAbstractSignature::SuiDerivedSignature {
            signature: sign_personal_message_signature,
        }),
        abstract_public_key: bcs::to_bytes(SuiAbstractPublicKey {
            sui_account_address,
            domain,
        }),
    },
}
```

with types:

```
enum SuiAbstractSignature has drop {
  SuiDerivedSignature {
      signature: vector<u8>,
  },
}

struct SuiAbstractPublicKey has drop {
  sui_account_address: vector<u8>,
  domain: vector<u8>,
}
```

And above message will be authorized with `0x1::sui_derivable_account::authenticate`,
for aptos account with address derevied from function_info and abstract_public_key with account_abstraction::derive_account_address.

`0x1::sui_derivable_account::authenticate` will generate the required text message format,
extract the `public_key` which is part of the `sign_personal_message_signature`,
derive the `account_address` from the `public_key`, and verify that the `account_address` matches with the one from the `abstract_public_key`.
In addition, it will verify that `sign_personal_message_signature` from `abstract_signature` is
correct signature of that message.

Looking at what each field in the message is and what is it used for:

- `domain` is a website domain issuing request to Solana Wallet, that Wallet itself will verify is correct.
  This sandboxes each `domain` into separate Aptos account, providing better isolation and security.
- `sui_address` is sui wallet account address including the `0x` prefix.
- `entry_function` is a string representation of an Aptos entry function transaction will execute. It contains address, module name and function name,
  for example `0x1::primary_fungible_store::transfer`.
  This restricts usage to only entry functions (i.e. preventing scripts, etc), but is made required as it is the main
  human-readable information about the transaction that user can read and understand.
- `network_name` is string representation of chain_id on which transaction can be executed on,
  with: "mainnet" for 1, "testnet" for 2, "local" for 4, and "custom network <chain_id>" for others
- `aptos_txn_digest` is the digest of the Aptos transaction that you want to execute. All details about the transaction itself,
  and replay protection is inside of the transaction. Note: "aptos_txn_digest" is guaranteed to be unique on Aptos, so it can be
  used raw directly as a nonce. Alternatively, it could've been designed to have aptos_txn_digest inside the message, and nonce be
  a separate user-controlled nonce, but that seems unnecessary.

Verification implementation is:

```
    public fun authenticate(account: signer, aa_auth_data: AbstractionAuthData): signer {
        let abstract_signature = deserialize_abstract_signature(aa_auth_data.derivable_abstract_signature());
        let (signing_scheme, abstract_signature_signature, abstract_signature_public_key) = split_signature_bytes(&abstract_signature.signature);

        // Check siging scheme is ED25519 as we currently only support this scheme
        assert!(get_signing_scheme(signing_scheme) == SuiSigningScheme::ED25519, EINVALID_SIGNING_SCHEME_TYPE);

        // Derive the account address from the public key
        let sui_account_address = derive_account_address_from_public_key(signing_scheme, abstract_signature_public_key);

        let derivable_abstract_public_key = aa_auth_data.derivable_abstract_public_key();
        let abstract_public_key = deserialize_abstract_public_key(derivable_abstract_public_key);

        // Check the account address matches the abstract public key
        assert!(&sui_account_address == &abstract_public_key.sui_account_address, EACCOUNT_ADDRESS_MISMATCH);

        let public_key = new_validated_public_key_from_bytes(abstract_signature_public_key);
        assert!(public_key.is_some(), EINVALID_PUBLIC_KEY);

        let digest_utf8 = string_utils::to_string(aa_auth_data.digest()).bytes();

        // Build the raw message
        let raw_message = construct_message(&sui_account_address, &abstract_public_key.domain, entry_function_name, digest_utf8);

        // Prepend Intent to the message
        let intent = Intent {
            scope: PersonalMessage,
            version: V0,
            app_id: Sui,
        };
        let msg = IntentMessage {
            intent,
            value: raw_message,
        };
        // Serialize the whole struct
        let bcs_bytes = bcs::to_bytes<IntentMessage>(&msg);

        // Hash full_message with blake2b256
        let hash = aptos_hash::blake2b_256(bcs_bytes);

        let signature = new_signature_from_bytes(abstract_signature_signature);

        assert!(
            ed25519::signature_verify_strict(
                &signature,
                &public_key_into_unvalidated(public_key.destroy_some()),
                hash,
            ),
            EINVALID_SIGNATURE
        );
    }
```

## Reference Implementation

https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/pull/16830

## Testing

Verified payload signed with signPersonalMessage with Slush is verified correctly and passes authorization

## Security Considerations, Risks and Drawbacks

- `domain` will not be verified, and it is on the user to understand risks.
  For that, we include in the message to "Please confirm you explicitly initiated this request from <domain>"
- Using this flow doesn't provide "simulation" information to the user (dapp could run simulation, but cannot be forced to), so user has less information about what is being signed.
  For that, direct wallet support would be needed.
- Without simulation, entry function is places inside the message, to help user understand better what it is authorizing. This is a balance between given user too much information
  (so it doesn't review it closely), like full json representation of the Aptos transaction, and having users sign without much information. It is a question if adding arguments to the entry function within the message itself is useful, they can give more context, but can also be quite large and hardly understandable.
- Note that actual address of the module where entry function is will be printed, while a lot UIs (explorer, wallet, etc) might maintain list of common ecosystem projects and addresses,
  and give users more easily understandable name. In order to do so here, we would need to maintain such list onchain, so there are tradeoffs to be considered.
- Currently, we only support `Ed25519` signing scheme, tho adding support to more schemes is doable.

## Future Potential

- `SuiAbstractSignature` is enum, so that we can support new message formats in the future.
  For example, we could add list of permissions from AIP-103 to be listed, giving a restricted access to the transaction itself
  - it also allows us, in case a security issue is found, to deprecate current message format while keeping access to the account

## Timeline

### Suggested implementation timeline

TBD

### Suggested developer platform support timeline

TBD

### Suggested deployment timeline

TBD
