---
aip: 114
title: Increase Coin Symbol Length
author: <a list of the author's or authors' name(s) and/or username(s), or name(s) and email(s). Details are below.>
discussions-to (*optional): <a url pointing to the official discussion thread>
Status: Draft
last-call-end-date (*optional): <mm/dd/yyyy the last date to leave feedbacks and reviews>
type: Standard (Framework)
created: 02/01/2024
updated (*optional): <mm/dd/yyyy>
requires (*optional): <AIP number(s)>
---

# AIP-114 - Increase Coin Symbol Byte Length

## Summary

Currently, emojis are 3 bytes, and could be longer up to 32 bytes. This AIP proposes to increase the coin and FA symbol
byte length to allow for more combinations of emojis to be used as a coin symbol. This is an increase behind a feature
flag to increase from 10 bytes to 32 bytes, and will need to adjust the indexer storage accordingly.

Goal here is to allow for more flexibility in coin symbols, and to allow for more unique coin symbols to be used.

### Out of scope

> What are we committing to not doing and why are they scoped out?

Not changing anything but the number of bytes allowed to be stored, and the Aptos default indexer.

## High-level Overview

Increases the limit to 32 bytes, adds a feature flag to enable this, and adjusts the indexer storage to allow for this.

## Impact

Indexers will now need to handle the longer symbol length. Most other applications simply read, and should not have any
issues with this change.

If this proposal doesn't happen, then we will be limited to 10 bytes for coin and FA symbols.

## Alternative Solutions

None, it's currently limited to 10 bytes, there's no other way to stick with UTF-8 and allow for more emojis.

## Specification and Implementation Details

- Framework change https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/pull/15846
- Indexer change https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processors-v2/pull/63

## Reference Implementation

Has a feature flag associated. See https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/pull/15846

## Testing

Will have to test in devnet / testnet against existing indexers to ensure they can handle the longer symbol length.

## Risks and Drawbacks

Risk is some indexers may not be able to handle the longer symbol length, and may need to be updated. This could break
existing indexers that handle generic types, but should not effect indexers for things like centralized exchanges.

## Security Considerations

None

## Future Potential

None
